openHAB 4.1 release blog post (#435)
openhab/website: blog/2023-12-22-openhab-4-1-release.md

---
layout: BlogPost
category: blog
title: openHAB 4.1 Release
author: Florian Hotze and others
date: '2023-12-22T18:00:00+02:00'
previewimage: /uploads/2023-12-22-openhab-4-1-release/header.jpg
tags:
  - news
excerpt: >-
  As usual before christmas, we are happy to announce a new release of openHAB, that brings many additions, improvements and fixes!
---
The first minor release of openHAB 4 has arrived! openHAB 4.1 brings several improvements and bugfixes as well as some nice additions!

TODO: Write intro

With that being said, we again want to share some statistics that show the activity in numbers.

# Activity

As you'd expect from any new openHAB release, we have had a high activity across all our GitHub repositories since our [summer release](/blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.html).
We therefore want to share a few statistics about our three main repositories: Core, add-ons and UI.

[openHAB core](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-core) has received 122 pull requests in total, with 31 bug fixes and 46 enhancements resulting in 10,238 lines of code added.

> Even though the number of pull requests decreased compared to our [summer release](/blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.html), that is still a lot of activity.

Reviewer: Do we need to mention its less?  I would just omit this sentence.

5 new add-ons were introduced, and with 437 pull requests, 121 bug fixes and 132 enhancements resulted in 13,071 lines of add-on code added to the [openHAB add-ons repository](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons).

Our [openHAB web UIs](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-webui) have also received many contributions: 129 pull requests including 46 bug fixes and 67 enhancements resulted in 6,235 lines of code changed.

> This means the number of pull requests only slightly decreased compared to our [summer release](/blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.html), which means our UIs continue to develop at a high pace.

Reviewer: Again i would not mention its less, just that it continues to be actively developed.

It is worth to mention, that [our other repositories](https://github.com/openhab) have also received numerous contributions (e.g. documentation), but listing them all would probably be too much here.
Big thanks to all our contributors for driving openHAB forward!

Finally, it is time to shout out to our top code contributors per repository (having done the most commits) for this new release:

- Wouter ([@wborn](https://github.com/wborn)) for openHAB core
- Jan ([@J-N-K](https://github.com/J-N-K)) for openHAB core
- Jacob ([@jlaur](https://github.com/jlaur)) for openHAB add-ons
- Leo ([@lsiepel](https://github.com/lsiepel)) for openHAB add-ons
- Florian ([@florian-h05](https://github.com/florian-h05)) for the openHAB Main UI
- Laurent ([@lolodomo](https://github.com/lolodomo)) for the openHAB Basic UI

> Most of them are also maintainers, which means besides of contributing code, they review pull requests and participate in discussions on GitHub issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of our top committers are also maintainers, which means besides contributing code, they also review pull requests and participate in discussions on GitHub issues which helps maintain our high level of quality across bindings, UI and Core.
```

> At present, we are 35 maintainers across all our repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At present, we have 35 maintainers across all our repositories.
```

- You can add the rule `go to mode $cmd$ on $name$` to an Item labeled `Vacuum` with command description `MODE_CLEAN=cleaning`:
  That will instruct the interpreter to send the command `MODE_CLEAN` to the Item on the phrase `go to mode cleaning on vacuum`.
- You can also capture free text with a rule like `watch $*$ on $name$`, so that the phrase `watch my favorite show on tv` will send the command `my favorite show` to the Item labeled as `TV`.

Two new configuration parameters where added to the dialog processor start/register command:

- The `dialogGroup` option prevents simultaneous processing of dialogs on the same group, so that several speakers located near-by won't be triggered at the same time.
- The `locationItem` option allows you to forward the location of a speaker/dialog processor to the standard interpreter.
  This makes the interpreter prioritize child Items of the location provided, so that you can use "Light" as Item label for two Items in different two different rooms with a speaker each, and the phrase `Turn on the light` will target the light Item of the correct room.

> ## Main UI Enhancements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Units of Measurement: currencies have arrived

_Jan N. Klug, openHAB Maintainer_

openHAB had good support for handling units in the past and that made a big step forward in ease-of-use with openHAB 4.

What was still missing (especially for energy management) was support for currencies.
We have now added two new dimensions `Currency` and `EnergyPrice`.

Currencies are different from "usual" units.
There are a lot more (each country has a different one) and even worse: their "conversion factor" is not fixed.

Think of length measurement: basically there is the metric and the imperial system.
The conversion from `mm` to `inch` is `25.4 mm = 1 inch`.
This has been the same ten years ago and will also be the same in 2050.
The factor (exchange rate) changes for Euro to US-Dollar on a very short time-scale.

It's even more complicated than that: A lot of countries use similar symbols (e.g. `$`) for their currency, but they mean different things: a Canadian dollar is not the same as an US dollar.
Luckily the ISO comes to our help.
ISO 4217 defines three letter "currency codes", unique for major currency.

openHAB supports a new type of service: the `CurrencyProvider`.
A `CurrencyProvider` can support one or more currencies (with at least the "currency code" as identifier) and brings the information how to convert between them.

Out of the box openHAB brings two very basic `CurrencyProviders`.
Both support only one currency, but you can still use them for calculations.
The "locale base currency provider" selects the currency based on the configured locale, so in Germany the currency will be "EUR", in Denmark it will be "DKK".
The "fixes currency provider" allows you to define your own currency, you just have to select a three-letter code that identifies it.

There are plans to enhance that with support for multiple currency and automatic update of exchange rates.

## Main UI Enhancements
```

You can find a [tutorial on the community forum](https://community.openhab.org/t/oh-4-1-tutorial-to-manage-custom-semantic-tags/148135).

### Voice System Enhancements

_Miguel Álvarez Díez, openHAB Contributor_

Some minor improvements were introduced in the built-in voice system components:

The standard text interpreter now uses the Item's synonyms metadata as alternative names, which helps to avoid name collisions.
It also automatically scans your Item's command description metadata, so that the rule `Set <ItemLabel> to <ItemCommandLabel>` is supported out-of-the-box for all supported languages.

Additionally, the `voiceSystem` metadata namespace was created to allow adding custom rules, for example:

- You can add the rule `go to mode $cmd$ on $name$` to an Item labeled `Vacuum` with command description `MODE_CLEAN=cleaning`:
  That will instruct the interpreter to send the command `MODE_CLEAN` to the Item on the phrase `go to mode cleaning on vacuum`.
- You can also capture free text with a rule like `watch $*$ on $name$`, so that the phrase `watch my favorite show on tv` will send the command `my favorite show` to the Item labeled as `TV`.

> Two new configuration parameters where added to the dialog processor start/register command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Two new configuration parameters were added to the dialog processor start/register command:
```

> - The `dialogGroup` option prevents simultaneous processing of dialogs on the same group, so that several speakers located near-by won't be triggered at the same time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `dialogGroup` option prevents simultaneous processing of dialogs on the same group, so that several speakers located nearby won't be triggered at the same time.
```

If you have persistence configured for an Item and the persistence service supports time series (most do: InfluxDB and JDBC will work fine, but RRD4J not), then sending a time series can be used to fill gaps in the past ("historic values", e.g. due to network issues) or - probably more important - store future values ("forecasts") for this Item.
A new persistence strategy `forecast` has been introduced, which does the real magic:
The Item's state will be updated to a value with a timestamp send in a time series just at the time the timestamp becomes current.
This way our Item will always reflect e.g. the current price, even if this forecast information was made available yesterday.

As a result, it is not only possible to generate charts for these future values, but they can also be easily used within rules through the persistence extensions.
This makes it much easier for users to implement complex optimization logic that requires forecast data, e.g. for heating control or energy management.

> With the introduction of time-series, we have made the first step for more advanced energy-management solutions within openHAB, and there is also ongoing work on the persistence extensions to improve forecast handling in rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the introduction of time series, we have made the first step for more advanced energy management solutions within openHAB, and there is also ongoing work on the persistence extensions to improve forecast handling in rules.
```

Compared to "usual" units, currencies are very different:
There are a lot more of them (each country has a different one) and even worse: Their "conversion factor" is not fixed.

Think of length measurement: Basically there is the metric and the imperial system.
The conversion from `mm` to `inch` is `25.4 mm = 1 inch`, which has been the same ten years ago and will also be the same in 2050.
In contrast to that, the factor (exchange rate) for Euro to US-Dollar changes on a very short timescale.

And it's even more complicated than that: A lot of countries use similar symbols (e.g. `$`) for their currency, but they mean different things: A Canadian dollar is not the same as a US dollar.
Luckily the ISO comes to our help: [ISO 4217](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217) defines three letter "currency codes", which are unique for major currencies.

To support currencies, openHAB adds a new type of service: the `CurrencyProvider`.
A `CurrencyProvider` can support one or more currencies (with at least the "currency code" as identifier) and brings the information how to convert between them.

> Out of the box openHAB brings two very basic `CurrencyProviders`, both support only one currency, but you can still use them for calculations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Out of the box openHAB comes with two very basic `CurrencyProviders`, both support only one currency, but you can still use them for calculations.
```

Many thanks to Dan Cunningham ([@digitaldan](https://github.com/digitaldan)) for implementing that!

## Sitemap and Basic UI Enhancements

_Laurent Garnier, openHAB Maintainer_

### New Sitemap element: `Buttongrid`

A `Buttongrid` represents a grid of buttons as typical for remote controls:
It allows to arrange a number of buttons, either labelled with a string or an icon, in a custom format.
When a button is pressed, the associated command is sent to the linked Item.

Here is the result in Basic UI, using the following definition:

```java
Buttongrid label="Remote Control" staticIcon=screen item=RemoteControl buttons=[1:1:POWER="Power"=switch-off , 1:2:MENU="Menu" , 1:3:EXIT="Exit" , 2:2:UP="Up"=f7:arrowtriangle_up , 4:2:DOWN="Down"=f7:arrowtriangle_down , 3:1:LEFT="Left"=f7:arrowtriangle_left , 3:3:RIGHT="Right"=f7:arrowtriangle_right , 3:2:OK="Ok" , 2:4:VOL_PLUS="Volume +" , 4:4:VOL_MINUS="Volume -" , 3:4:MUTE="Mute"=soundvolume_mute]
```

<p align="center"><img style="max-width: 70%;" src="/uploads/2023-12-22-openhab-4-1-release/basicui-buttongrid.png"/></p>

> Please note that this new element is currently only supported in Basic UI, but it is already worked on supporting it in the Android app as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note that the support for this new element is currently limited to Basic UI. However, efforts are underway to extend its support to the Android app.
```

(or similar, the wording "is is already worked on supporting" seems a bit complex)

We therefore want to share a few statistics about our three main repositories: Core, add-ons and UI.

[openHAB core](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-core) has received TODO pull requests, TODO bug fixes and TODO enhancements with TODO lines of code added.
The number of pull requests has TODO compared to our [summer release](/blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.html).

TODO new add-ons were introduced, and with TODO pull requests, TODO bug fixes and TODO enhancements resulted in TODO lines of add-on code added to [openHAB add-ons](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons).

Our [openHAB web UIs](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-webui) have also received many contributions: TODO pull requests, TODO bug fixes and TODO enhancements resulted in TODO lines of code added.
TODO the number of pull requests compared to our [winter release](/blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.html).

It is worth to mention, that [our other repositories](https://github.com/openhab) have also received numerous contributions (e.g. documentation), but listing them all would probably be too much here.

> Thank you to all our contributors for driving openHAB forward!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Big thanks to all our contributors for driving openHAB forward!
```

Finally, it is time to shout out to our top code contributors per repository (having done the most commits) for this new release:

- Wouter ([@wborn](https://github.com/wborn)) for openHAB core
- Jan ([@J-N-K](https://github.com/J-N-K)) for openHAB core
- Jacob ([@jlaur](https://github.com/jlaur)) for openHAB add-ons
- Leo ([@lsiepel](https://github.com/lsiepel)) for openHAB add-ons

> - Florian ([@florian-h05](https://github.com/florian-h05)) for the openHAB MainUI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Florian ([@florian-h05](https://github.com/florian-h05)) for the openHAB Main UI
```

> - Laurent ([@lolodomo](https://github.com/lolodomo)) for the openHAB BasicUI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Laurent ([@lolodomo](https://github.com/lolodomo)) for the openHAB Basic UI
```

Most of them are also maintainers, which means besides of contributing code, they review pull requests and participate in discussions on GitHub issues.
At present, we are TODO maintainers across all our repositories.

> Thank you to my colleagues for making openHAB 4.1 a christmas present to our community!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Many thanks to my colleagues for making openHAB 4.1 a christmas present to our community!
```

# Highlights

TODO: Write short summary

Therefore, please have a look at the [**release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.1.0) and check out the following highlights.

## Core Runtime Enhancements

## UI Enhancements

## Add-on Enhancements

# Enjoy and Get in Touch!

> We hope that you like the new release as much as we do - as always our [community forums](https://community.openhab.org/) are there for questions, comments and discussions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We hope that you like the new release as much as we do - as always our [community forum](https://community.openhab.org/) is there for questions, comments and discussions.
```
